Operational Considerations
==========================

This document offers some recommendations based on lessons learned from running 
Gazette in production at LiveRamp. Note that the recommendations here refer
to V2.

Cloud Costs
~~~~~~~~~~~

At LiveRamp, Gazette is deployed entirely in the cloud: both clients and brokers 
run on a Kubernetes cluster whose underlying nodes are spread across multiple 
zones, and journal content is persisted to cloud storage. While relying on cloud 
infrastructure makes it easy to scale usage up and down as needed, it can also 
make the task of predicting costs more difficult, especially for high-traffic 
systems like ours that deal with data on the order of terabytes each month.

Storage Costs
`````````````

1. For non-recovery log journals, define retention policies for each category of 
   data according to its usage requirements, and then enforce these by configuring
   lifecycle policies via the cloud storage provider. For example, one could have
   a bucket's files be transitioned to cold storage X days after creation (which 
   would keep the data backed up but not immediately accessible for a much lower 
   cost than standard storage), and then finally have it transition to expiry. 
2. For backing stores that do not support lifecycle policies, and for more fine-
   grained control over retention, use `gazctl journals prune` (currently in 
   development; issue can be tracked here: https://github.com/LiveRamp/gazette/issues/100). 
   By invoking `gazctl journals prune -l my-selector`, one can have all matching
   journal fragments that match the label selector and are older than the current
   configured retention (as specified by the `fragment.retention` property in the
   `JournalSpec`) be deleted across all configured backing stores. This could be
   automated via a cron or a regular Kubernetes job. Note that the tradeoff of
   adopting this approach over (1) is that it entails additional API operations
   for the deletes, which may cost more depending on what store is being used.
3. For recovery log journals, use the `gazctl shards prune` command-line tool 
   periodically to delete fragments that are no longer needed. Note that a 
   simple time-based lifecycle policy like what is described in (1) will not 
   work for recovery logs, because historical portions of the recovery log may
   still contain current database content. To identify whether a recovery log
   fragment is still needed, we have to examine the shard's current hints 
   (which is how `gazctl shards prune` works), and the age of the fragment is
   not relevant.

Data Transfer Costs
```````````````````

If clients and brokers are spread across multiple availability zones or even
regions, consider the costs incurred by inter-zone traffic. In the case of
writes, the client must issue its write to the current primary broker of the
journal, regardless of whether that primary is in the same zone as the client.
The primary in turn replicates the data to all its peers, again regardless of
their zones. In V2, all journals must be allocated across more than one zone
to ensure the durability of writes in the face of zone failures, which means
that a write will always lead to inter-zone traffic.

While there is not currently a way to mitigate data transfer costs due to writes,
data transfer costs due to reads are mitigated by using a read strategy where
a client will prefer to read from a replica that is in the same zone as itself.
This preference is automatically specified if one uses the offical `gazette`
and `consumer` helm charts for deployment (see https://github.com/LiveRamp/gazette/tree/master/v2/charts).
In those charts, we supply the Gazette client with the preferred zone (i.e. the
zone that the client itself is in) by populating the `consumer.zone` flag with the
correct zone: https://github.com/LiveRamp/gazette/blob/f69dd917aca714333f915385f79d98f0cb4b5c74/v2/charts/consumer/templates/deployment.yaml#L54.
(That zone is generated by a script, node-zone.sh, that takes a Kubernetes node
name as input and gives the zone of that node as output.) We also do the same for
the Gazette broker by populating the `broker.zone` flag: https://github.com/LiveRamp/gazette/blob/f69dd917aca714333f915385f79d98f0cb4b5c74/v2/charts/gazette/templates/deployment.yaml#L47.
If one is not using the official helm charts and wishes to have a zone-aware
read strategy be enforced, then one would have to ensure that the `consumer.zone`
and `broker.zone` flags are correctly set during deployment.
