Usage:
  gazctl [OPTIONS] journals [journals-OPTIONS] reset-head [reset-head-OPTIONS]

Reset the append offset of journals.

Gazette appends are transactional: all brokers must agree on the exact offsets
at which an append operation will be written into a journal. The offset is an
explicit participate in the broker's transaction protocol. New participants are
"caught up" on the current offset by participating in broker transactions, and
brokers will delay releasing responsibility for a journal until all peers have
participated in a synchronizing transaction. This makes Gazette tolerant to up
to R-1 independent broker process failures, where R is the replication factor
of the journal.

However, disasters and human errors do happen, and if R or more independent
failures occur, Gazette employs a fail-safe to minimize the potential for a
journal offset to be written more than once: brokers require that the remote
fragment index not include a fragment offset larger than the append offset known
to replicating broker peers, and will refuse the append if this constraint is
violated.

I.e. if N >= R prior failures occur, then none of the present broker topology
for a journal may have participated in an append transaction. Their synchronized
offset will be zero, which is less than the maximum offset contained in the
fragment store. The brokers will refuse all appends to preclude double-writing
of an offset.

This condition must be explicitly cleared by the Gazette operator using the
reset-head command. The operator should delay running reset-head until absolutely
confident that all journal fragments have been persisted to cloud storage (eg,
because all previous broker processes have exited).

Then, the effect of reset-head is to jump the append offset forward to the
maximum indexed offset, allowing new append operations to proceed.

reset-head is safe to run against journals which are already consistent and
and are being actively appended to.


Application Options:
      --zone=                        Availability zone within which this process is running (default: local) [$ZONE]

Logging:
      --log.level=[info|debug|warn]  Logging level (default: info) [$LOG_LEVEL]
      --log.format=[json|text|color] Logging output format (default: text) [$LOG_FORMAT]

Help Options:
  -h, --help                         Show this help message

[journals command options]

    Broker:
          --broker.address=          Service address endpoint (default: http://localhost:8080) [$BROKER_ADDRESS]
          --broker.cache.size=       Size of client route cache. If <= zero, no cache is used (server always proxies) (default: 0) [$BROKER_CACHE_SIZE]
          --broker.cache.ttl=        Time-to-live of route cache entries. (default: 1m) [$BROKER_CACHE_TTL]

[reset-head command options]
      -l, --selector=                Label Selector query to filter on

